>> This is Session 204, Building Compatible Websites Using
Emerging Web Technologies and my name is Vicki Murley,
I'm the Safari Technologies Evangelist at Apple.
So you have seen some pretty cool web technology this week.
You saw a great presentation on CSS
Effects, how to create rich user interfaces
and add rich animations to your websites.
We had a great session on HTML 5 Audio and Video
Elements, where you saw how easy it was to add audio
and video to web pages and then integrate
that media with other elements in the page.
And just before this session we had another
great session on HTML 5 Offline Data,
so you saw how you could store data
locally from your web application.
The one thing that is generally very high on the
list of concerns for web developers is compatibility.
So generally we think about compatibility
in kind of a one to one relationship.
Like this plug works with this socket
or this mouse works with this computer
or this website works with this web browser.
And this one to one relationship would be
fine if we were back in 2002 for instance.
Back then a little over 2% of people were using Netscape
Navigator, a little over 1% were using something else,
but the vast majority of people were
using one version of Internet Explorer.
Over the last couple of years the landscape for
browser market share has definitely changed.
Now almost 40% of people are using
something other than Internet Explorer
and even that Internet Explorer chunk
is divided into different versions.
So lots of people visiting your website could
be using you know, any different browser.
So instead now from that kind of one to one compatibility
relationship that I described, compatibility for websites
and web browsers really means a
one to many kind of relationship.
If you want your website to get lots of traffic,
have lots of visitors, have lots of users,
you have to be compatible with a wide range of browsers.
So that is the conundrum today.
We have all of these amazing web technologies
and we want to make them available to users,
to deliver the best possible user experience, but
at the same time we want your site to be available
to the largest number of users that is possible as well.
So this is the problem that we're going to address today.
How to merge these two issues.
The way we're going to address it, first we're going to
talk about some common coding pitfalls and how to avoid them
and after that we're going to move on to specific
fallback techniques for each of the three technologies
that I just mentioned, CSS Effects, HTML
5 Media Elements and HTML 5 Offline Data.
So let's get started with common coding pitfalls.
Probably the number one most common
coding pitfall that most people run into,
that I've ever seen has got to be browser sniffing.
And this is the practice of looking to see which web browser
the webpage is currently being viewed in and then serving
up code that is specific to that browser.
The way that people do browser sniffing
is by looking at the user agent string.
The user agent string is a string that is sent by the
web browser to the web server when a webpage is requested
and you can also see what the user
agent string is in JavaScript
if you execute user, navigator.useragent, ask Safari.
Safari will again return its user agent string.
So you can fetch this user agent string in JavaScript and
then do some parsing on that string to figure out exactly
with browser and which version of that browser
and on which platform you are running in.
So let's take a quick look at the
anatomy of a user agent string.
So this is Safari 4's user agent string
on 10_5_7 and it has some key components.
The first is the Safari version number, it's version 4.0.
The second we have the Safari build number, it's 530.17.
The next one is the WebKit build number, it's also 530.17.
And then we also have some platform information.
So this particular version of Safari
is running on MacOS X 10_5_7.
So you can look at this user agent string and
determine which browser your page is being viewed in
and serve up code that is specific to that browser.
To do that you have to parse the string.
To take a closer look at parsing, we're
going to go all the way back to 1998,
because this is kind of when the whole
browser sniffing, user agent string,
examining that string, that's when
all of this kind of started.
At this time in 1998, there were really two
browsers that almost everyone was using.
It was like a 55/45 split almoUst and those two
browsers were Internet Explorer and Netscape Navigator.
So we have an example here.
We have both of their user agent strings and we have
some code to examine those strings and set variables
to let us know whether the user is looking
at our page in IE or in Netscape Navigator.
And what our code might look like, in pseudo code of
course, is we might have three branches of our code.
One is the Internet Explorer branch, one is the Netscape
Navigator branch and the third is sort of everybody else.
So I may have some you know, it's 1998, so maybe I have an
image rollover effect and I'm using document.all to do that,
but with Netscape I have to use document.layers,
so I have a different branch for that
and my everybody else branch, they
don't get a rollover at all.
I'm just going to use a static image for everyone else.
So you know, here's the idea.
We've got these three branches but what happens when
the new information is added to the user agent string?
So this was the Internet Explorer user
agent string back in 1998, this is MS IE4,
this is the user agent string of IE8 today, 2009.
So you can see, a lot of change has happened in you know,
more than ten years but those changes happened incrementally
and the code that you're using to parse that string has to
be robust enough to handle all of those unexpected changes.
You also can run into a situation where the
version number of the same browser changes
and this isn't you know, a problem
that only happens in the past.
This is currently happening as well.
Opera is getting ready to ship Opera 10 and in their testing
they found that some very high profile key banking websites,
identified them as Opera version 1, not version 10.
Just because of an error in the way that
they were parsing the user agent string.
You can read more about that on
one of their blog entries there.
So we talked about you know, what
happens if the user agent string changes,
well there are other problems with
this approach of browser sniffing.
So what if new features are added?
Well if it's supported in one browser, I have to
add the code there, then maybe it's later supported
in another browser, I'm going to add
it there as well, modify my code again.
The everyone else branch, it never gets
access to the new feature so sorry for them.
Also not quite as common but sometimes features are removed.
So we all know document.layers is not around anymore.
Now that code path is totally broken.
And often as we know now, especially in the last
couple years, new browsers are sometimes released.
So any new browser that would come out
and you haven't updated your parsing code
and the way you've structured these branches, it's
just going to get, your kind of everybody else branch
and it could be that the new browsers that have come out
support every feature that you're looking for but the users
that are visiting your site in those browsers are
going to get a very minimal, even degraded experience.
So it becomes obvious as we think about the user agent
string changing, new versions of existing browsers,
features being added, features being
removed, new browsers coming out,
it becomes obvious that this approach
becomes unmanageable, very quickly.
Luckily there is a better approach
and that is feature detection.
And the premise of feature detection is
that you test and branch on features,
not the current browser that the page is being viewed in.
So a lot of the problems that we talked about user
agent string changes, new versions of existing browsers,
features being added, features
being removed, new web browsers,
a lot of these go away if you're using feature detection.
It's not to say that feature detection is sort of the
end all, be all solution and you're never going to have
to update your code again and your life is going to
be perfect, but it does alleviate a lot of the pain
of unexpected changes and adopting new
features in other browsers, et cetera.
So let's look at some common feature detection techniques.
You can check to see if a certain object exists,
you can check to see if a certain function
exists if you want to use a particular feature.
I would see if the open database method
exists if I wanted to use the HTML 5 SQL API.
You can test a property like innerHTML or contentEditable.
So you can test all sorts of things
and branch your code accordingly.
But there are some pitfalls that
I would like to make you aware of.
First of all let's look at this one.
Here I'm calling window.opendatabase.
I'm actually executing the function here.
I really don't need to.
I just want to see if it exists.
In this one I'm actually calculating
the value of .interhtml.
So if I had a very large webpage and I
got all the .interhtml of that webpage,
just to see if this property existed,
that would be really bad.
And also at times you can get false negatives.
So document.body.contenteditable, is actually
checking to see not if content editable exists,
but if it is set on the body and set to true.
You know, it could be set to false or not set at all, which
would evaluate to 0, but then that would be telling me
that this feature isn't supported
if I were to use this approach.
So there's actually a better approach for
testing just for the existence of objects,
properties and methods and that's to use In.
So we can change all of these to use In if
XMLHttpRequest with IN window, open database in window,
enter HTML In document.body and
content editable, indocument.body
and we'll save ourselves from the
problems that I just mentioned.
So this is a much better approach.
Another best practice if you're using feature
detection, always set construct your code branches
so that you're branching to web standards first.
Not only do you have a better chance of having
the same rendering across multiple browsers
that all support standards, so your website is
likely to look and behave the same in more browsers
if you're using standards, but also it's just you
know, best practices to test probable conditions first.
Lastly, make sure that you don't use feature detection
as kind of a way to do browser sniffing you know.
We all know that looking at the user agent string is bad
because parsing is often fragile, but you don't want to look
at a given feature that you know only one
browser implements and then have a long,
long block of code all specific to that browser.
OK, so that covers some common coding
pitfalls and how to avoid them.
Now we're going to get into specific fallback
techniques and we're going to start off with CSS Effects.
[ no speaking ]
So many, many applications on MacOS X use animation and
rich effects to enhance the experience for the user.
So some really good example animations are when I
minimize a window to the dock, it doesn't just disappear
and then reappear in the dock, there's an
animation that tells me exactly where it went.
In iPhoto, if I want to get a closer look at
one of these photos, I can double-click it,
it doesn't just appear at a larger size, it actually
animates out to the larger size for me to view.
People are coming to expect these
same sort of rich interactions
and rich animations in web applications as well.
So here we have the same photo album in MobileMe and I
have the exact same experience that I have on the desktop.
When I double-click a photo, it animates out to a
larger size so that I can get a closer look at it.
One of the technologies that makes this
possible in web browsers is CSS Effects.
So there are many different kinds of CSS
Effects, there's text and image effects,
there's CSS Transforms which allow you to translate,
skew, scale or rotate an element in space on the page.
There's CSS Transitions which are just simple animations.
And we also have CSS Animations which give you
fine-grained control over the behavior of the animation path
and there are also a couple dom
events associated with CSS Animations,
so that you can know when an animation
has started, stopped or iterated.
So I'm not going to go too in depth on the details
of how to implement CSS Effects in your web pages,
because we already had a whole session on this
earlier this week and if you weren't able to catch it,
you'll be able to watch it on video through ADC and I highly
recommend that you do that because it was a great session.
Instead, we're going to dig into the
fallback techniques for CSS Effects.
We're going to tackle three areas.
First we're going to talk about Automatic Graceful
Fallback, next we're going to talk about Dynamic Fallback
with JavaScript and third we're
going to talk about Media Queries.
So let's get started with Automatic Graceful Fallback.
So the concept here is incredibly simple.
It could not be simpler.
Automatic Graceful Fallback really
just means that any CSS property
that a browser doesn't understand, it just ignores it.
It drops it.
It doesn't render it.
That's it.
That's the only thing that you need to know.
What this requires though, this concept, it
requires you kind of letting go of that idea
that every website has to look
exactly the same in any browser.
So here's a great example.
My text on the left is enhanced.
It has a couple shadows behind it that are
two different colors and it looks really cool.
The text on the right doesn't have those shadows
behind it, but it's still readable you know.
So this is a great example of how
Graceful Fallback kind of works.
Browser on the right doesn't understand
these text shadow properties
and so it just simply doesn't render
them but the page is still functional.
So to illustrate this idea we have a demo and we
are going to invite Dean Jackson to the stage.
[ applause ]
>> I'm pretty sure when they think
graceful they come straight to me.
OK, so as Vicki said, CSS has this great feature
where effectively it breaks easily for you.
It ignores things that it doesn't know about.
And it's important to realize that this was actually
a conscious design decision from the start of CSS.
Because the people writing the specifications wanted
to be able to update the specification and innovate
without having to wait for browsers to catch up.
And also you're not always sure what
type of browser you're going to be using.
You might have users that are on an
old version of the current browser,
say Safari 3, haven't upgraded to Safari 4 yet.
Or they might be browsing with a completely
different context such as a voice browser
or you know have a completely different device
characteristics or they might be stuck on a browser
that has a huge market share but hasn't had
many new features added to it for a while.
But so it would have been quite easy to sort of shame
some browsers in this bit so I'm trying to avoid that.
So what am I going to do here is I've got this blog,
it's quite a prestigious blog, it's my WWDC blog
and I believe I've stuck to the terms of the
NDA by not giving out too much information.
You can see it's pretty, it's a pretty standard,
it's pretty minimal feel, something you want to do.
Now this is in fact the display
you'd get on a legacy browser,
sort of designed for the absolute base you
know, lowest common denominator type thing.
But it's a pretty common view.
What I want to do is add that bling
that Vicki mentioned on the slide.
I want to add a few simple things in the CSS, using the
new features of CSS, but I don't want to break the page.
So there's three important rules I want to do.
I don't want to ever touch the content of the page.
I'm not going to, let's assume
that I can't touch the content.
I don't own it in this case because it's
my blog but I don't, can't touch it.
Secondly, I'm not going to even touch the style
sheet that's currently applied to the page.
I don't want to change any of the style rules.
What I am going to do is add new style
rules to the page in the new style sheet.
The most important rule number three is, the new rules
I add, every one of them has to gracefully degrade.
So they have to be either ignored
or have no effect on an old browser.
So basically just adding functionality to the page.
You can sort of think of this as what you might be able
to do tonight to sort of you know, bling up your page.
Because it turns out believe it, it was a surprise to me,
but lots of attendees at WWDC use
modern browsers like Safari so.
So OK, I'm going to show you what I do.
Like I said, I don't want to shame a
browser, so I'm actually going to use a trick
and normally you would just load you know, you'd
load the new styles in your existing style sheet.
I've just got a little button up here
and it's got a little bit of JavaScript
that adds a new style element to
the page with the new rules.
So I can switch between sort of on or off.
So here's what we're going for,
here's where we're coming from.
Like I said, normally you would just put the new rules.
So let's just have a look at the style sheet.
These are the new rules on the page.
I'm not going to worry too much about
the syntax because all this is documented
on the developer.apple.com/safari website.
Let me just point out some things.
So one thing that's quite obvious
is we've got a custom style sheet.
Now I guess most of you know that browsers have,
there's a very limited set of fonts that can be used
across on all platforms and I assume if you
know a web developer they'll talk you to death
about how annoyed they are that
there's only a limited set of browsers.
So what I've done here is I want to,
I've added two new fonts to the page.
I want to have a different font for the heading and I've
got a nice font down here for the, you see this is something
that doesn't ship with the operating system.
And all I've done in the CSS is I've
linked to the OTF, the Open Type File.
You can link to a True Type or Open Type file.
I just give it a name and then I put
it directly into my Font Family rule.
Now what's happened is because Safari supports embedded
fonts, it sees this font first in the list and uses it.
Other browsers that don't support the
embedded font, just go on to the list
and get the default fonts that
I've already written for the page.
You can see here I use Anivers, you can use
any name you want and you can link to any file.
Next up let's have a look at this
element here, the blue navigation.
Just added some rounded corners
to it, as I toggle between it.
It's a really simple rule.
I've just added a border radius of 12 pixels.
Really simple one rule.
On a browser that doesn't support border radius, it just
gets ignored and you can see actually how the extensions
to CSS works because I've also included the rule for border
radius that Mozilla uses and this is running in Safari
but because Safari doesn't understand
the Mozilla rule it just ignores it.
It doesn't have any different, it
doesn't change the page in any way.
So sort of using the extensions in reverse.
Next, I've got this bright and bubbly personality so
I wanted to have a sort of glow effect on the header.
This is the sort of purple little bit at the top and I could
have used an image and that would have been quite simple,
but let's say I wanted to cut down on
the amount of resources I'm downloading.
I want to declare a gradient in CSS and again I won't get
into the syntax, but here's the rule for the header element
and I have a gradient, I just define, I wanted a circular
gradient, a radial gradient, I define where it is
and how big I want it to be and then I just say the two
colors that I want to blend from and I get this sort
of nice effect that you see is pretty
common in lots of the Apple designs.
Next up shadows.
Really wanted these sort of boxy
elements to pop out from the page.
You can see here got this nice shadow.
I ... actually do I...
no. But anyway, you can see there's
a little shadow on the edge here.
This is like again the simple, simple property to add,
WebKit box shadow and I just say where I want the shadow
to be, offset, how blurred I want
it to be and I can specify color.
Again, WebKit box shadow isn't supported on some
other browsers, but that's not going to matter.
They'll just get the default fallback of no shadow.
But it's not just limited to boxes.
If you look really closely, its very subtle
effect is that the text here has a shadow.
So it's hard to see, if you look while the font's changing,
you can see it actually just jumps
out a bit from the background.
It's got a shadow too.
If you've ever looked really, really closely at the
iPhone UI, if you look at the top of the navigation bars,
you'll see that the text, even though it's really
small, has this very, very small shadow inside it,
these text shadows can really add to the page
without sort of being completely in your face.
So just like box shadow, text shadow you don't even need the
prefix for this one, same rules and you can apply any color.
Just the way shadows work in real life, well not really no.
OK, another great example.
I wanted to style the list here a little differently,
this is just a plain list but on my enhanced page I wanted
to have alternate rows in a slightly
different background color.
Now while I said, we mentioned
that property rules are the things,
if the browser doesn't understand it it'll just
ignore it, in this case, background color is sort
of supported by nearly every browser out there.
But it's not just property rules that gets
ignored, here I've used a CSS selector.
So I've used a CSS 3 selector called Nth Child and what this
means is every odd numbered child in the element is going
to have this rule applied to it and so if the
browser doesn't support in this case the selector,
all the property definitions within
that selector are just ignored.
Same way property rules are ignored,
the selector rules can be ignored.
So in this case, Safari gets background color.
I've also added a little transition because
I wanted an effect where I say well,
what happens when you put your mouse over it and I'll
sort of slide it down and you probably would do it faster
in real life, but I wanted this nice effect
to give sort of interactive feedback.
I didn't want it to just snap to a color.
And I can do this again because transition isn't supported.
Now lastly to the cool one.
Now you'll notice here the difference between this
image, oh I've added sort of a feathered edge to it,
I've also added a little pop effect, so
as I put my mouse over it, it does this.
In the old browser of course, it's not doing anything.
Sort of just an extra feature you can add.
Now this one looks a bit complicated.
We'll start with the mask.
It's actually got quite a detailed syntax, but I've just
basically added some images that I've put into the page
that will cut out of the image
and give you a blurred effect.
You can actually do any sort of shape you want.
I also said that when the image is being drawn
normally, I'm applying a transform at a scale of .97.
What I've mean is I've just made the image a little
bit smaller and when it's in the hover state,
I make the scale 1.03, just a little bit bigger
and I also give it this little 5 degree rotation.
So I give it a twist.
I've also added a transition, let's say over half a
second, I want you to animate between these two values
and that's what you get, this pop in and pop out effect.
So as you can see like that's all I did?
The existing page hasn't changed.
My grandfather who's still running an
old browser is going to see my blog.
I don't know why he would be reading a
WWDC blog, but all the important users
that are using modern browsers are
going to get a better experience.
So that's it.
[ applause ]
>> Thanks Dean.
So just a couple points to reiterate from the demo.
Don't forget, if you're using web font or embedded
font, to always specify a fallback font as Dean did.
Also if your layout is dependent on the metrics of
your current font, make sure that the embedded font
that you choose, the web font that
you choose, has comparable metrics.
So here maybe I'm going to use this stencil font
in my web page and my fallback font is Helvetica,
well this isn't you know, quite as wide as the stencil
font, so maybe Verdana would be a better choice for me.
Also as Dean pointed out, pay attention to prefixes.
Prefixes are really in place so that we can get the style
property out to early adopters before the final standard is
in place and people can use these
properties safely, essentially.
What happens is we have the property now.
When the property becomes part of a
final standard, that property is dropped
and your website remains compatible
regardless of whether there were changes
between where we first implemented the property with
the prefix and when the final standard was ratified.
So that covers Automatic Graceful Fallback.
Now let's move on to Dynamic Fallback with JavaScript.
So this is very simple.
We're actually using a technique that
we saw earlier in the presentation.
We're just looking to see, we want to
see if CSS Transitions are supported.
So we're going to check to see if the WebKit
transition property is in document.body.style
and if that expression evaluates to
true, then transitions are supported.
This is very useful because if you're already
using JavaScript to do some animations,
CSS Animations are often triggered by JavaScript.
So it's very easy to go and modify
your code to now use CSS Animations.
This is actually really important, especially when you
consider devices with limited CPU power such as iPhone,
that would benefit from the hardware
acceleration that you get in a CSS Animation
that of course would never be possible
with a JavaScript animation.
OK, lastly we're going to talk about media queries for CSS.
So a media query allows you to tailor your CSS based on the
characteristics of the display and they generally consist
of a media type, some that you may
have heard of are ScreenPrint, TTY, TV,
All is another media type and a list of media features.
So in this case we're talking about CSS Effects, so
our list of media features that we're going to talk
about are transformed 2D, transformed
3D, transition and animation.
There's many more, but this is the
list that we're talking about today.
So here's an example where we have a media
query that loads a given style sheet.
If it's a screen device and 2D transforms are supported.
So here is our media type screen and here
is our media feature, transformed 2D.
You can also use media queries as we just saw,
to load a style sheet or you can query inline.
So here we have an example where we have a media
query inline in our CSS style sheet and we're saying
if it's a screen device and 2D transforms and transitions
are supported, then make all my divs scale down by 80%
but when I hover over them, scale them up
by 20% greater that their original size.
So you can do these inline and also as you notice, you can
have a list of operators to compose more complex queries.
Here we're using And to say that we want a device
that supports 2D transforms and transitions,
but you can also use Or and Only I believe.
So again, here's our media type and
here is our list of media properties.
OK, so that covers CSS Effects, now
let's move on to HTML 5 Media Elements.
All right, so we're going to talk about a few things here.
First we're going to just briefly touch
on why HTML to embed media in web pages.
Second we're going to talk about creating compatible static
markup and after that we're going to move on to talking
about creating compatible content on the fly.
So why HTML?
Well HTML Media Elements greatly
simplify media playback on the web.
Not only for you the developer, you just have
to add one line of code to now have a video
in your webpage, but also for your users.
They don't have to download a plug-in or
install anything to be able to see video.
Also, this is part of the HTML 5 standard.
It means that many, by virtue of being a standard, it
means it's available for anyone to adopt and implement
and in fact, many browsers out there
today already implement these elements.
It's also the best way to display
video in Safari on all platforms.
You can have the same exact code and get
the optimized user experience whether you're
on the desktop or in Safari on iPhone.
So you saw for example at a session earlier this week,
how you could have rich interactions with other elements
on the page if you were using HTML 5 Audio or
Video Elements on the desktop and on iPhone we saw
that same exact code running full
screen, looking great on iPhone.
That session that I was just talking about happened on
Wednesday and so I'm not going to go into much more detail
about how to use just the basics of HTML 5 Media Elements,
but I suggest that you catch this
one as well, via ADC on iTunes.
Catch the video.
So let's talk about creating compatible markup.
There's really two things that you need to think about.
There's basic content fallback and there's
also working with multiple media resources.
So the basic content fallback is dead simple.
It's basically whatever is nested in between the opening
and closing video tags, is your fallback content.
One thing to note here is this fallback content is
only displayed if the video tag is not supported.
It's not displayed for things like errors.
Like if it tried to load the video and the file
was not found or the file was corrupt or broken
or even if you're pointing to an unsupported codec in
none of those cases is the fallback content displayed.
Only displayed if the video tag is not supported.
Moving on to working with multiple media resources.
So on the video tag you know, you may be used to
seeing like an embed tag that has a type attribute.
Well there isn't one of the video tag here.
Instead we just have this source attribute and
whatever we throw at it, it will attempt to play.
So we sort of have built in dynamic
support with this source attribute.
Safari will support any installed linear codec
supported by QuickTime, so that includes the default set
of installed codecs and also any
codecs that a user may install later.
Those will all work with the source
attribute on the video tag.
You may want to be able to show different encodings on
different platforms or if users are viewing your page
in different browsers that have different support.
The way to do that is to use the source tag.
So you can specify a list of sources within the video
tag and basically what happens is the user agent,
the web browser iterates through the list and it
just attempts to play the first encoding that it can.
The first supported encoding.
It doesn't continue after there's a failure,
so back to those failure cases again.
If there's you know, the file is corrupt or not found
or something, this isn't really a fallback technique
in the sense that if there's a failure
it doesn't just try the next one.
You can also use on the source tag a type, the type
attribute to specify a mime type and this is great
because you can query within the web browser, whether or not
the web browser is going to be able to play a certain type.
So without having to go hit the server
and touch the video on the server at all.
So this is great.
It really saves you a lot of network requests
and makes things better for your users.
We talked about media queries before.
You can use media queries here in the source
tag as well, using the media attribute.
So this is just an example.
Maybe I have in for Safari on the desktop, I want to serve
up Safaridemo.mp4, so I would look for a screen device maybe
with a minimum device width of 600 pixels and maybe
for another example I want to serve up a different file
for Safari on iPhone, so I might look for a screen
device with a device width of 340 pixels, for instance.
That's the device width on iPhone.
OK, now let's move on to Creating
Compatible Dynamic Content.
So you can detect audio and video support in JavaScript.
It is very simple.
You might want to do this if you're generating markup
on the fly or if you're toggling the visibility
of a customized user interface, we'll
talk more in more detail about that later.
You also might want to detect on the fly,
whether or not a given codec is supported.
Might want to do that if you want to direct
your users to a certain type of content.
So the way that we check to see if audio and video tags
are supported at all is we just again use this technique
that we used earlier in the presentation, we
checked to see if HTML video element is in window.
If it's not, then video is not supported.
So in the session earlier this week, they defined custom
controls to play, pause, scrub the video, et cetera.
If the video tag isn't supported, then
your users aren't going to be able
to use those controls to interact with the video.
So in this case you would want to probably
hide those controls, fallback to a plug-in
and just use those boring plug-in controls instead.
You can also detect in JavaScript as I mentioned,
whether or not a given codec is supported.
So you do this using the canPlayType
method and you supply it a mime type.
The answer that you're going to get might surprise you.
It's going to be either probably, maybe or no.
The reason is though that all we're really
supplying to canPlayType is a mime type and codecs,
there's so many details that are so complicated,
it's not really possible to know conclusively
if a given user agent can play a
given codec just from the mime type.
So "probably" is probably the best
answer that you're going to get.
So here's an example of using canPlayType.
We're checking to see if my video element that
I fetched earlier, can play the type video/MP4
if the value returned is not equal to probably,
I'm just going to fallback to a plug-in
and if it is supported I'm going to use the video element
and maybe implement some custom controls
and do some very advanced, cool stuff.
OK, so that covers it for HTML 5 Media Elements.
Now let's move on to Offline Data.
OK, storing data offline.
What can you currently use to store data offline?
There's not a lot out there for you, outside of browsers
that implement HTML 5 Offline Data capabilities.
You have cookies and you have syncing to the cloud.
Those are pretty much your options if your
browser doesn't support these HTML 5 features.
So here in HTML 5, this is just a totally, extraordinarily
new and different way of thinking about things.
You know, we have CSS Animations well you
can fallback to JavaScript animations maybe.
There's not really a great substitute for
things like local storage and session storage.
You could use a cookie but it's not as simple and easy.
You also have the SQL API which you can use
to store structured data in a local database.
And you also have the Application cache
which will store all the resources
for your web application locally on the user's machine.
The benefits here, they're open web standards so
even if they're not implemented everywhere now,
they are able to be implemented
in any browser in the future.
Your code complexity is greatly reduced.
It's much easier to use local storage or session storage.
Just set a key value instead of doing
some complicated cookie parsing.
You have very fast data access because
the data is right there on disk
and it's also functional without a network connection.
So without going into too much more detail
about the nuts and bolts of how the basics
of HTML 5 Offline Data, we just had a session about this.
So again, catch it on ADC on iTunes.
So we talked a little bit about how offline data in
HTML 5 is just a totally revolutionary technology.
There's been nothing else like it up until this point.
And so what is there really to fallback to?
You know, there's not a while lot.
there/s really no substitute for the structured
data storage that you're going to be able to get.
There's really no substitute for storing all the resources
for your application locally on the user's machine.
So one thing that you could do is modify your user
interfaces and modify your application to make sure
that they work well even if offline
functionality isn't supported.
So that's what we're going to talk about today.
If you want to check for offline functionality,
again we're going to visit the same concepts
that we've been talking about throughout this presentation.
If you want to see if local storage
and session storage are supported,
just look for localStorage or sessionStorage in window.
If you want to see if the SQL API is supported,
just check for openDatabase in window.
And also if you want to see if the offline application cache
is supported, you can check for applicationCache in window.
So to illustrate this idea, we would like
to invite Beth Dakin back to the stage.
>> Hi everyone.
Thanks Vicki.
If you were here at the offline data session just about an
hour ago, then you would have seen that my colleague Brady
and I came up with a Checkers web application.
So I'm going to show that to you now and
show how you can make it gracefully fallback
in browsers that don't support local storage.
OK cool. So here's our Checkers web application in
Safari 4 and it's just this pretty fun little game
and we implemented two local storage features.
There's this Manage Games button is one of them.
It auto-saves games as I play and I
can manually save a game at any time.
And then there's the High Scores feature
too that it keeps track of high scores
as you play the game like over time between sessions.
So now I'm going to show you this same game in Safari
3.1, which I am going to load here from a script.
So this is Safari 3.1, which does not support local storage,
an old version of Safari and so I can still play my game
but you'll see that if I go to my Manage
Games screen, it didn't auto-save anything
and if I try to save a game, nothing happens.
So really it's kind of silly to have these two
features, these two buttons, the Manage Games button
and the High Scores button showing at all in this browser
or other browsers that don't support local storage.
So our solution here is just going
to be to hide these buttons
So let's take a look at the code.
So I have, this is my JavaScript file that builds up the
UI for the game and you'll see I'm adding all kinds of dizz
and checkerboards and turn indicator lights
and here's the relevant part to this.
I have these three functions to add the buttons and
it's just the second two buttons that I don't want
to include anymore, so I'm just going to add...
[ no speaking ]
... a conditional statement around them so that we'll
only add these buttons when we have local storage support.
And I've been really careful with the way I've
built up my application so that none of this code,
none of this local storage code will
run unless I click those buttons.
So I don't have to worry about anything else.
But I also added guards at all of those points, anytime that
I use local storage just because in case anything changes,
it's always good to have a guard in place so that
we don't have a JavaScript exception anywhere.
So let's look at this again in Safari 3.1,
you'll see the buttons have just disappeared
and I can still play my Checkers game and if we go back
to Safari 4 and reload, then I still have the buttons
and I can still play Checkers and I can still
access all of my great offline data features.
And so that's all.
[ Applause ]
>> Thanks Beth.
That was really simple.
Just like one line of code and
it was fixed in any other browser
that doesn't support local storage and that's the idea.
So let's recap what you have learned today.
So the first number one thing that we talked
about was why you should not use browser
sniffing to construct branches in your code.
Instead use feature detection.
Next we looked at CSS and we saw that CSS
enhancements are incredibly easy to add and add a lot
of visual interest and polish to your website.
We took a close look at HTML 5 Audio and Video Elements
and we learned about simple fallback mechanisms
and also some fine-grained control for
how to handle different codec support.
And lastly, we talked about HTML 5 Offline
Data and what a great feature it is and we saw
that it's just incredibly simple to detect.
So that is it for today.
If you want more information you can contact me,
Vicki Murley, the Safari Technologies Evangelist
and also there's a wealth of documentation on the
Safari Dev Center at developer.apple.com/Safari.